---
title: Getting Started
layout: default
filename: Installation
--- 
# Getting Started
**P4TrafficTool** is an automed code generator for packet analyzer tools. In order to compile p4-traffictool on your computer, you have to make sure the prerequisites mentioned in the following section, have already been installed. 
## Dependencies
* **p4c compiler:**  The input to p4-traffictool is the json file produced by the open-source [p4c](https://github.com/p4lang/p4c) compiler, specifically the `p4c-bm2-ss` backend. You can use the scripts [here](https://github.com/jafingerhut/p4-guide) to install `p4c` and the `p4c-bm2-ss` backend. For the `p4c-bm2-ss` backend to compile correctly, you may need to install [behavioral model](https://github.com/p4lang/behavioral-model) first. Post installation, `p4c-bm2-ss` should be available in your _PATH_. 
* **Python interpreter:**  p4-traffictool is written in Python and can work with both Python2 and Python3. Most Linux distributions come preinstalled with either Python2 or Python3. Required python packages: `json`, `sys`, `os`, `re` and `tabulate`. The first four are included in the standard python installation, you can install `tabulate` with `pip install tabulate`.
* **Traffic Tools:**  Since you are trying to install and use p4-traffictool, we assume you have the appropriate traffic generation/parsing tools for which you would be auto-generating the code. p4-traffictool currently supports code generation for [Scapy](https://scapy.net), [PcapPlusPlus](https://github.com/seladb/PcapPlusPlus), [MoonGen](https://github.com/emmericp/MoonGen/) and [Wireshark Dissector](https://wiki.wireshark.org/Lua/Dissectors).

## Installation
* Clone this repository. 
```shell
git clone https://github.com/NUS-SNL/p4-traffictool.git
```
* Run `configure.sh` to check for dependencies.
* (Optional) Run `install.sh` to add the alias `p4-traffictool` to `.bashrc` in order to avoid specifying the full path to `p4-traffictool.sh` script.

## Installation checks and tests (optional)
To perform a sanity check that the code produced by the tool is compatible with the tools available on your system you can use `./runtests.sh`. It runs the tool with a sample p4 program and its corresponding json file to produce scapy codes and checks that they are equivalent.
It then uses the generated scapy code to produce a pcap file `tests_data.pcap`. Then it generates the lua dissector and uses it with tshark to parse the pcap file and checks if the fields are parsed correctly.

Fulfilling all the above required tests prints `Tests passed`. This ensures that the tool is compatible with the wireshark and scapy installation on your system. If your system is missing `p4c` or `p4c-bm2-ss` then suitable error message is displayed before `Tests passed`.

Use `./runtests.sh clean` to wipe out all the code and pcap file generated from the tests directory.
## Docker
A Dockerfile is provided in the repository of P4TrafficTool. In order to use that, first you should make sure that you have Docker installed on your computer. Also you need to assign a directory to be used by the Docker container in order to get the inputs from the host and give back the outputs generated by p4-traffictool (this is called a volume). Let's say we create this folder in our root directory and call it myvol. Put your .p4 code that you want to provide p4-traffictool with, in this directory. Now you can simply run the command below:

```shell
sudo docker run -it -v <name of your local dedicated dir>:<a name assigned to your working dir in p4-traffictool container> p4-traffictool

# for example
sudo docker run -it -v ~/myvol:/data p4-traffictool
```
This will result in starting an interactive bash session in your terminal. Now you can use the commands specified in [Usage](https://nus-snl.github.io/p4-traffictool/Usage.html) section to work with p4-traffictool. Note that while providing the path to your `p4` or `json` file in the command, you should use the directory that you specified after colon mark in `docker run` command. For example in our case it would be like this (if we want to generate code for scapy):

```shell 
./p4-traffictool.sh -p4 /data/<filename>.p4 --scapy
```

The outputs generated by p4-traffictool will be placed in the volume linked to the containter.

